Python API GPU tutorial (#269)
Probe-Particle/ppafm: doc/sphinx/source/tutorials/afmulator-tutorial.md

# GPU-accelerated AFM simulations

The command-line interface to ppafm can only utilize the CPU.

> The simulations can be sped-up by at least a couple of orders of magnitude by utilizing a graphics processing unit (GPU).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The simulations can be sped up by at least a couple of orders of magnitude by utilizing a graphics processing unit (GPU).
```

In order to make use of the GPU acceleration in ppafm, install it with `pip` using the `[opencl]` option, as detailed on the  [installation page on the wiki](https://github.com/Probe-Particle/ppafm/wiki/Install-ppafm).

The tutorial here concerns how to run GPU-accelerated AFM simulations programmatically via the Python API, which is most useful when running a large number of simulations in a batch.

> If you are looking to study an individual system and experiment with the simulation parameters, the [graphical user interface](https://github.com/Probe-Particle/ppafm/wiki/PPAFM-GUI)
> may be better suited for that purpose.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In contrast, the [graphical user interface](https://github.com/Probe-Particle/ppafm/wiki/PPAFM-GUI) is better suited to study an individual system and experiment with the simulation parameters, 
```

> This tutorial also assumes that you are already familiar with the basic of the structure of the ppafm simulation. If not, take a look at the wiki pages explaining the [basics of the simulation](https://github.com/Probe-Particle/ppafm/wiki#probe-particle-model) and the [different force field models](https://github.com/Probe-Particle/ppafm/wiki/Forces).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial also assumes that you are already familiar with the basic structure of the ppafm simulation.
If not, take a look at the wiki pages explaining the [basics of the simulation](https://github.com/Probe-Particle/ppafm/wiki#probe-particle-model) and the [different force field models](https://github.com/Probe-Particle/ppafm/wiki/Forces).
```

An easy way to find the number of the correct device is to list all of the devices usable by `ppafm` by running `ppafm-gui --list-devices` on the command line.
```

At the first step we simply load a sample molecule to the memory (using here the [graphene example](https://github.com/Probe-Particle/ppafm/tree/main/examples/Graphene)):
```python
xyzs, Zs, qs, _ = loadXYZ("./Gr6x6N3hole.xyz")
print(xyzs.shape, Zs.shape, qs.shape) # (71, 3) (71,) (71,)
```
Here we get the three main inputs that we need for the simulation as `numpy` arrays: the atomic coordinates (`xyzs`), the atomic numbers (`Zs`), and partial charges for each atom (`qs`).
Instead of partial charges, the Hartree potential for the sample can be used as well (see [](#hartree-electrostatics)).

The second step creates the simulator object with some of the basic parameters:
```python
afmulator = AFMulator(
    pixPerAngstrome=10,
    scan_dim=(201, 201, 40),
    scan_window=((0.0, -10.0, 5.0), (20.0, 10.0, 9.0)),
    iZPP=8,
    df_steps=10,
    tipR0=[0.0, 0.0, 3.0]
)
```
We set here the following parameters:
- `pixPerAngstrome` sets the density of points in the force-field grid.

> The default value of 10 is usually adequate, but in some cases a higher value can lead to slighly more accurate results, but at the expense of higher video memory usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default value of 10 is usually adequate, but in some cases, a higher value can lead to slightly more accurate results, but at the expense of higher video memory usage.
```

This can be seen in the plotting step above where we transpose the array with `.T` and specify `origin='lower'`.
```

The type of force field used in the simulation is decided by the input arguments when calling the `AFMulator` object.
The following sections discuss how to use the different force fields.

### Lennard-Jones with point-charge electrostatics

The Lennard-Jones force field is the default force field, which is used when only the `xyzs`, `Zs`, and `qs` arguments are given without the sample electron density `rho_sample`:
```python
afm_images = afmulator(xyzs, Zs, qs, rho_sample=None) # rho_sample=None is the default, but is shown explicitly here for clarity
```
The type of the `qs` argument decides what kind of electrostatics is used.
In order to use point-charge electrostatics, `qs` needs to be a `numpy` array of charges for each atom in the system.
Typically the charges would be stored in a .xyz file and can be loaded using the {func}`.loadXYZ` function as shown in the examples above.
The charges can come from, for example, Hirshfeld or Mulliken charge-partition analysis.

The simulation can also be run without the electrostatic contribution.

> If the input .xyz file does not contain point charges for the atoms, then `loadXYZ` will simply return an array of zeros for `qs`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the `.xyz` input file does not contain point charges for the atoms, then `loadXYZ` will return an array of zeros for `qs`:
```

The quadrupole moment here comes to $-10 e \times (0.07Å)^2 \approx -0.05 e \times Å^2$.
For other tips, we may want to use a different charge distribution.
For example, for a Xe tip a monopole charge is a better model:
```python
afmulator = AFMulator(
    ...
    iZPP=54, # Xe
    Qs=[0.3, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0],
    QZs=[0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0]
)
```

(hartree-electrostatics)=
### Lennard-Jones with Hartree electrostatics

A more accurate calculation of the electrostatic force can be done using the Hartree potential of the sample, typically calculated by density-functional theory (DFT) codes such as VASP or FHI-aims.
We can use a Hartree potential saved in a .xsf or .cube file by loading it into an instance of the {class}`.HartreePotential` class:
```python
from ppafm.ocl.AFMulator import HartreePotential
potential, xyzs, Zs = HartreePotential.from_file("./LOCPOT.xsf", scale=-1.0)  # scale=-1.0 for correct units of potential (V) instead of energy (eV)
```
Since the file also contains the geometry of the system, in addition to the `potential`, we also get the `xyzs` and `Zs` when loading the file.

> In order to use the loaded potential, we simply substitute it for the `qs` argument when running the simulation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use the loaded potential, we substitute it for the `qs` argument when running the simulation:
```

```python
afm_images = afmulator(xyzs, Zs, qs=potential)
```

```{note}
The `AFMulator` expects the potential to be in units of volts, but most DFT codes output the potential in units of energy, typically in eV or in Hartree.

> When loading files, `ppafm` currently always assumes that .xsf files are in units of eV, and .cube files are in units of Hartree which immediately get converted to eV.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When loading files, `ppafm` assumes that the `.xsf` files are in units of eV and the `.cube` files are in units of Hartree, which immediately get converted to eV.
```

> In order to convert the eV to V, we simply multiply by -1 (corresponding to division by the electron charge, -e), hence the `scale=-1.0` when loading the Hartree potential above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To convert the eV to V, we multiply by -1 (corresponding to division by the electron charge, -e), hence the `scale=-1.0` when loading the Hartree potential above.
```
